RadialGradientBrush API review (#67)
microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml-specs: api_review/RadialGradientBrush/RadialGradientBrush.md

This brush will ship in the WinUI 2 NuGet/Framework package. Since it can be used on older Windows 10 versions, where the CompositionRadialGradientBrush isn't available, it has fallback behavior to draw a solid color instead when necessary, as is done by [AcrylicBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Media.AcrylicBrush).

## Composition brush usage

The Xaml RadialGradientBrush will inherit from [XamlCompositionBrushBase](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.xaml.media.xamlcompositionbrushbase) and use a [CompositionRadialGradientBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.composition.compositionradialgradientbrush), which is supported on Windows 10 1903 (v10.0.18362+). This seems like a useful model for new brushes going forward for both WinUI 2 and 3, and we aren't too concerned about duplicating some properties from other candidate base classes [GradientBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.xaml.media.gradientbrush).

> The RadialGradientBrush API will more closely mirror the behavior of the Composition API than the WPF API: for example, the gradient origin defaults to center and provides a `GradientOrigin` property to specify an offset rather than providing a `GradientOrigin` property.

Reviewer: This sentence is confusing. Don't we match WPF behavior now ? WPF's origin defaults to center and the same property exists going from 0-1 with 0,0 as the top left.

Reviewer 2: I missed that in the conversion, I updated it now.

### Animation support

Ideally, RadialGradientBrush would support animation of GradientStops and other properties using composition animations by implementing [IAnimationObject](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.composition.ianimationobject). However, the `IAnimationObject` interface and support for animation of non-composition types is only supported on Windows 10 1809 (v10.0.17763) and newer. This could be revisited with WinUI 3.

## Downlevel fallback behavior

When this brush is used on pre-1903 versions of Windows, where [CompositionRadialGradientBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Composition.CompositionRadialGradientBrush) isn't available, the options for fallback behavior are:

1. Draw a gradient using another renderer, e.g. Direct2D
   * This would require loading additional expensive dependencies which WinUI doesn't currently rely on.
2. Draw a custom gradient surface, e.g. using a CompositionSurfaceBrush or WriteableBitmap
   * This would require largely reimplementing the complex CompositionRadialGradientBrush.

> 3. **Rely on FallbackColor**

Reviewer 2: Recommend: Make it more clear that this is the choice that was made.

![A rectangle filled with a radial gradient.](images/ColorRadialGradientBrush.png)

XAML
```XAML
<Page
  xmlns:media="using:Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Media">

  <Rectangle Width="200" Height="200">
      <Rectangle.Fill>
          <media:RadialGradientBrush>
              <GradientStop Color="Blue" Offset="0.0" />
              <GradientStop Color="Yellow" Offset="0.2" />
              <GradientStop Color="LimeGreen" Offset="0.4" />
              <GradientStop Color="LightBlue" Offset="0.6" />
              <GradientStop Color="Blue" Offset="0.8" />
              <GradientStop Color="LightGray" Offset="1" />
          </media:RadialGradientBrush>
      </Rectangle.Fill>
  </Rectangle>

</Page>
```

This example creates a radial gradient that uses Absolute mapping mode with custom values for `EllipseCenter`, `EllipseRadius` and `GradientOrigin`:

![A rectangle filled with an offset radial gradient.](images/OffsetRadialGradientBrush.png)

```XAML
<Page
  xmlns:media="using:Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Media">

  <Rectangle Width="200" Height="200">
      <Rectangle.Fill>
          <media:RadialGradientBrush
            MappingMode="Absolute"

>             EllipseCenter="0.5,0.5"

Reviewer: This is not accurate. When in absolute mapping mode, In order to get results that match the picture above, the values will need to be 
EllipseCenter="50,50"
EllipseRadius="100,100"
GradientOrigin="50,0"

Reviewer 2: I got confused about mapping modes during the conversion, I've updated it. But shouldn't the GradientOrigin for this picture be 100,50?

When `MappingMode` is set to `Absolute`, the X and Y values of the three properties are treated as absolute coordinates within the brush's rendered bounds.

## Windows 10 Version Support

Gradient rendering is supported on Windows 10 version 1903 (v10.0.18362.0) and higher. On previous OS versions the brush will render a solid color specified by the `FallbackColor` property.

## See Also

* [LinearGradientBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.LinearGradientBrush)

* [CompositionRadialGradientBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.composition.compositionradialgradientbrush)

# API Notes

## Fields

| | |
| - | - |
| EllipseCenter | The center of the ellipse that contains the gradient. The default is `(0.5, 0.5)`. |
| EllipseRadius | The radius of the ellipse that contains the gradient. The default is `(0.5, 0.5)`. |

> | GradientOrigin | The gradient origin's offset from the center of the element. |

Reviewer 3: The behavior now is starting from top left and the default is updated to be the center.

```suggestion
| GradientOrigin | The gradient origin's offset from the top left the element. The default is `(0.5, 0.5)` |
```

| MappingMode | Defines whether `EllipseCenter`, `EllipseRadius` and `GradientOriginOffset` represent relative coordinates in the range 0 to 1 or absolute coordinates. The default is `RelativeToBoundingBox`. |
| SpreadMethod | Gets or sets the type of spread method that specifies how to draw a gradient that starts or ends inside the bounds of the object to be painted. The default is `Pad`. |

# API Details

```C++
[webhosthidden]
[contentproperty("GradientStops")]
unsealed runtimeclass RadialGradientBrush : Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.XamlCompositionBrushBase
{
    RadialGradientBrush();

    Windows.Foundation.Point EllipseCenter { get; set; };

    Windows.Foundation.Point EllipseRadius { get; set; };

    Windows.Foundation.Point GradientOriginOffset { get; set; };

    Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.BrushMappingMode MappingMode { get; set; };

    Windows.UI.Composition.CompositionColorSpace InterpolationSpace { get; set; };

    Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.GradientSpreadMethod SpreadMethod { get; set; };

>     Windows.Foundation.Collections.IObservableVector<Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.GradientStop> GradientStops { get; };

Reviewer 2: Discussion:
Note that this is a get-only IVector property, whereas the existing [GradientBrush.GradientStops](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.GradientBrush.GradientStops) is a read/write concrete type. The advantage of a concrete type is that it can be created in markup and can be data bound and shared.

But with a read-only property you can still set the stops in markup, you just can't for example define a stop collection in a ResourceDictionary and then use it in multiple places on the page.

The existing GradientStopCollection doesn't raise change notifications (no public API), so implementing this would be difficult unless we created a new collection type.

The read-only property is less work and looks good enough in terms of scenarios we can think of. We can always add a setter later.

| InterpolationSpace | The color space used to interpolate the gradient's colors. The default is `Auto`. For supported values, see [CompositionRadialGradientBrush.InterpolationSpace](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.composition.compositiongradientbrush.interpolationspace#Windows_UI_Composition_CompositionGradientBrush_InterpolationSpace) |
| MappingMode | Defines whether `Center`, `RadiusX`, `RadiusY`, and `GradientOrigin` represent relative coordinates in the range 0 to 1 or absolute coordinates. The default is `RelativeToBoundingBox`. |
| SpreadMethod | Gets or sets the type of spread method that specifies how to draw a gradient that starts or ends inside the bounds of the object to be painted. The default is `Pad`. |

# API Details

```C++
[webhosthidden]
[contentproperty("GradientStops")]
unsealed runtimeclass RadialGradientBrush : Windows.UI.Xaml.Media.XamlCompositionBrushBase
{
    RadialGradientBrush();

    Windows.Foundation.Point Center { get; set; };

    Windows.Foundation.Point RadiusX { get; set; };
    

>     Windows.Foundation.Point RadiusY { get; set; };

Reviewer 2: Radius properties should be type Double

          <media:RadialGradientBrush
            MappingMode="Absolute"
            EllipseCenter="50,50"
            EllipseRadius="100,100"
            GradientOriginOffset="50,0"
            >
              <GradientStop Color="Yellow" Offset="0.0" />
              <GradientStop Color="Blue" Offset="1" />
          </media:RadialGradientBrush>
      </Rectangle.Fill>
  </Rectangle>

</Page>
```

# Remarks
<!-- Explanation and guidance that doesn't fit into the Examples section. -->

<!-- APIs should only throw exceptions in exceptional conditions; basically,
only when there's a bug in the caller, such as argument exception.  But if for some
reason it's necessary for a caller to catch an exception from an API, call that
out with an explanation either here or in the Examples -->

## Gradient layout

The gradient is drawn within an ellipse that is defined by the `EllipseCenter` and `EllipseRadius` properties. Colors for the gradient start at the center of the ellipse and end at the radius.

The colors for the radial gradient are defined by color stops added to the `GradientStops` collection property. Each gradient stop specifies a color and an offset along the gradient.

> The gradient origin defaults to center and can be offset using the `GradientOriginOffset` property.

Author: This "OriginOffset" approach of offsetting from center is currently consistent with [CompositionRadialGradientBrush](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.ui.composition.compositionradialgradientbrush), vs. WPF which instead had an "[Origin](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.media.radialgradientbrush.gradientorigin?view=netframework-4.8#System_Windows_Media_RadialGradientBrush_GradientOrigin)" property. 

Is it better to have closer WPF copy-pasteability or to be consistent with newer WinUI/WinRT APIs?

Reviewer 4: I prefer being consistent within WinUI/WinRT itself. 

In the beginning, may new developers to WinUI (Desktop) will probably have a rather strong background in WPF. As the WinUI developer story will mature over the coming years though, I believe more and more developers will join who don't necessarily have that strong background. They will expect and should be provided with an in itself consistent platform for the best developer experience.

Reviewer 2: Discussion:
WPF and default value is 0.5,0.5
Composition Origin is the middle and then offsets from that.
Both have 0,0 at the upper left

Seems odd for 0,0 not to be the "origin"

Summary:
In Comp you can't set the origin but you can offset the origin. (So it's an Origin _Offset_ property)
In WPF you set the origin but you can't offset it. (Origin property defaults to 0.5,0.5)

So what should the origin be, upper left like WPF or center like Comp?

Let's follow up on the reasoning behind the Comp choice of origin concept. Pending new information, let's align with WPF for consistency within the two Xaml APIs.

## Gradient layout

The gradient is drawn within an ellipse that is defined by the `Center` and `EllipseRadius` properties. Colors for the gradient start at the center of the ellipse and end at the radius.
The gradient is drawn within an ellipse that is defined by the `Center`, `RadiusX`, and `RadiusY` properties. Colors for the gradient start at the center of the ellipse and end at the radius.

The colors for the radial gradient are defined by color stops added to the `GradientStops` collection property. Each gradient stop specifies a color and an offset along the gradient.

The gradient origin defaults to center and can be offset using the `GradientOrigin` property.

`MappingMode` defines whether `Center`, `EllipseRadius` and `GradientOrigin` represent relative or absolute coordinates.
`MappingMode` defines whether `Center`, `RadiusX`, `RadiusY`, and `GradientOrigin` represent relative or absolute coordinates.

> When `MappingMode` is set to `RelativeToBoundingBox`, the X and Y values of the three properties are treated as relative to the brush's rendered bounds, where `(0,0)` represents the top left and `(1,1)` represents the bottom right of the brush's rendered bounds for the `Center` and `EllipseRadius` properties and `(0,0)` represents the center for the `GradientOrigin` property.

Reviewer: We should say the element bounds instead of the brush's rendered bounds. That is the current behavior (same as WPF). We say it here and a couple more times in the document.

Reviewer 5: Thanks, fixed!
